.Dd June 9, 2026
.Dt NACRE 1
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm nacre
.Nd Perl-native interactive shell for development work
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Op Fl h
.Op Fl Fl help
.Nm
.Op Fl Fl plain
.Op Fl Fl no-rc
.Op Fl Fl color Ar auto|always|never
.Op Fl Fl strict
.Nm
.Op Fl Fl plain
.Op Fl Fl no-rc
.Op Fl c Ar command
.Nm
.Op Fl Fl plain
.Op Fl Fl no-rc
.Fl Fl script Ar file
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is an interactive shell for Unix-like systems.
Normal command lines run as
normal programs, while scripting and configuration use real Perl through
.Fn CORE::eval
in the Perl interpreter running Nacre.
.Pp
The shell is designed for daily development work.
It includes pipelines,
redirection, background jobs, aliases, abbreviations, marks, history,
bracketed paste, ghost suggestions, project detection, timing helpers, and a
Perl rc file.
.Pp
.Nm
is not a POSIX shell replacement.
Do not install it as
.Pa /bin/sh
and do not use it for boot-critical scripts or software that requires exact
POSIX shell behavior.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Fl c Ar command , Fl Fl command Ar command
Run one Nacre command line and exit.
If
.Ar command
contains newlines, it is evaluated as a text block.
.It Fl Fl script Ar file
Read and execute a file containing Nacre command lines and Perl-mode lines.
.It Fl Fl no-rc
Start without reading the user rc files.
.It Fl Fl color Ar mode
Set color handling.
Valid modes are
.Cm auto ,
.Cm always ,
and
.Cm never .
.It Fl Fl plain
Use plain output.
This is equivalent to
.Fl Fl color Cm never
and is useful for scripts, tests, and logs.
.It Fl Fl strict
Enable stricter behavior for compatibility checks reserved for future versions.
.It Fl Fl version
Print the Nacre version and exit.
.It Fl h , Fl Fl help
Print command-line help and exit.
.El
.Pp
When standard input is not a terminal,
.Nm
reads all input from stdin and executes it as a text block.
.Sh SHELL MODEL
Nacre chooses between command mode and Perl mode.
.Pp
Command mode is the default for input that looks like a normal command.
Perl
mode is selected for lines that clearly begin as Perl, such as variable
assignments, loops, conditionals, package declarations, helper calls, and
expression mode.
.Pp
Nacre does not implement a Perl-like language.
Perl-mode code is real Perl,
evaluated inside the persistent
.Cm Nacre::User
package.
.Sh COMMAND MODE
Command mode runs external commands and Nacre builtins:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
ls -lah
cat README.md | grep Nacre
echo hello > out.txt
sleep 30 &
jobs
.Ed
.Pp
Supported command conveniences include simple pipelines, simple redirects,
background commands, aliases, abbreviations, glob expansion, variable
expansion, and builtins.
.Pp
Typing a directory by itself changes into that directory:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
src
\&..
~/Downloads
.Ed
.Sh PERL MODE
Perl-looking input is evaluated as Perl:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
$x = 40
say $x + 2
for my $f (files "*.pl") { say $f }
if (-e "Cargo.toml") { run("cargo check") }
.Ed
.Pp
Expression mode starts with
.Sq = :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
= 2 + 2
= join ", ", files("*.pl")
= perl_runtime()->{executable}
.Ed
.Pp
Use
.Ic perl-runtime
to inspect the actual Perl executable, version, architecture, and runtime path
being used by the shell.
.Sh SCRIPTING
Run one command:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nacre -c 'doctor .'
nacre -c '= 2 + 2'
.Ed
.Pp
Run a script file:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nacre --script file.nacre
.Ed
.Pp
Run a block from stdin:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
printf '%s\n' 'say "hello from Perl"' | nacre --plain --no-rc
.Ed
.Pp
Use
.Fl Fl plain
and
.Fl Fl no-rc
for repeatable script and test output.
.Sh CONFIGURATION
The canonical rc file is:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
~/.config/nacre/nacrerc.perl
.Ed
.Pp
Nacre also creates a synced home dotfile:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
~/.nacrerc.perl
.Ed
.Pp
On systems that support symlinks, the home dotfile may point to the canonical
config file.
If both files exist as regular files, Nacre synchronizes the newer
file over the older file at startup.
.Pp
The rc file is Perl source evaluated in the same runtime used by interactive
Perl mode:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
option transient_prompt => 1;
option ghost_text       => 1;
option ghost_color      => 'auto';
option prompt_style     => 'power';
option prompt_newline   => 1;
option auto_title       => 1;

alias ll => 'ls -lah';
alias gs => 'git status --short --branch';
abbr  g  => 'git';
abbr  c  => 'cargo';

env EDITOR => 'nano';
mark src => "$ENV{HOME}/src";

on preexec => sub {
    my ($line) = @_;
};

on chpwd => sub {
    my ($dir) = @_;
};
.Ed
.Pp
Reload configuration inside Nacre:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
reload
.Ed
.Pp
Show configuration paths and settings:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
help rc
set
.Ed
.Sh INTERACTIVE EDITOR
Nacre uses a cbreak editor with history, completion, prompt redraw, and
bracketed paste support.
.Pp
Common keys:
.Bl -tag -width "Right Arrow"
.It Ic Enter
Run the current line or complete block.
.It Ic Ctrl-C
Cancel current input, or interrupt the foreground command while one runs.
.It Ic Ctrl-D
Exit when the input line is empty.
.It Ic Ctrl-L
Clear and redraw.
.It Ic Ctrl-A , Ctrl-E
Move to the start or end of the line.
.It Ic Ctrl-U , Ctrl-K
Delete before or after the cursor.
.It Ic Ctrl-W
Delete the previous word.
.It Ic Tab
Show or complete candidates.
.It Ic Up , Down
Move through history.
.It Ic Left , Right
Move the cursor.
Right accepts ghost text when the cursor is at the end.
.It Ic Ctrl-F
Accept the ghost suggestion.
.It Ic Home , End
Move to the start or end of the line.
.It Ic Delete
Delete the character under the cursor.
.El
.Pp
Bracketed paste inserts pasted text as one editable buffer and waits for
.Ic Enter
before executing it.
.Sh GHOST SUGGESTIONS
Ghost suggestions are generated from recent history, abbreviations, aliases,
executable commands, and path matches.
They are intentionally subtle and adapt
to terminal color support.
.Pp
Color behavior:
.Bl -tag -width "truecolor terminals"
.It truecolor terminals
Use 24-bit dim gray.
.It 256-color terminals
Use xterm gray 242.
.It 16-color terminals
Use faint bright black.
.It Ev NO_COLOR No or plain mode
Disable ghost text styling.
.El
.Sh BUILTINS
Navigation:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
cd DIR
pwd
pushd DIR
popd
dirs
up 2
take new/project
.Ed
.Pp
Marks:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
mark proj ~/projects/my-game
go proj
marks
unmark proj
.Ed
.Pp
Aliases:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
alias ll="ls -lah"
alias gs="git status --short"
aliases
unalias ll
.Ed
.Pp
Environment and path:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
export EDITOR=nano
unset DEBUG
env
path show
path add ~/.local/bin
path rm /some/bad/path
.Ed
.Pp
System and development helpers:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
sysinfo
doctor .
which cargo
type cd
history 50
highlight script.nacre
transcript path
clear
clear -x
.Ed
.Pp
Job control:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
sleep 30 &
jobs
fg 1
bg 1
kill 1
.Ed
.Pp
Timing:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
time -- cargo build --release
time -p -- perl -e 'select undef,undef,undef,0.25'
time -- ls -lah | wc -l
.Ed
.Sh PERL HELPERS
These helpers are available in Perl mode and rc files:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
run("ls -lah")
run("wc", "-l", "file")
sh("echo $SHELL")
capture("git status --short")
cd("src")
pwd()
files("*.pl")
slurp("README.md")
spew("out.txt", "hello\n")
append("log.txt", "entry\n")
which("perl")
env("EDITOR", "nano")
edit("README.md")
option transient_prompt => 1
alias ll => "ls -lah"
abbr g => "git"
on preexec => sub { my ($line) = @_ }
.Ed
.Sh INSTALLATION
Install from a release checkout:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
\&./install.sh
.Ed
.Pp
Install to a custom prefix:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
PREFIX="$HOME/.local" ./install.sh
.Ed
.Pp
Install using a remote script:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
curl -fsSL https://raw.githubusercontent.com/robert-nelson/nacre/main/install.sh | sh
.Ed
.Pp
The installer copies
.Nm ,
.Nm nacre-update ,
and this manual page under the selected prefix.
.Sh UPDATING
Update from a release checkout:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
\&./update.sh
.Ed
.Pp
Update an installed copy:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nacre-update
.Ed
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev NACRE_HOME
Override the configuration directory.
The default is
.Pa ~/.config/nacre .
.It Ev NACRE_RC
Override the rc file path.
.It Ev NO_COLOR
Disable color output.
.It Ev NACRE_ASCII_PROMPT
Use an ASCII prompt.
.It Ev NACRE_NO_GIT
Disable Git prompt detection.
.It Ev PREFIX
Install or update prefix used by
.Pa install.sh
and
.Pa update.sh .
.It Ev NACRE_RAW_BASE
Base URL used by install and update scripts for remote downloads.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa ~/.config/nacre/nacrerc.perl
Canonical user configuration file.
.It Pa ~/.nacrerc.perl
Synced home dotfile for quick editing.
.It Pa ~/.local/state/nacre/history
Command history.
.It Pa ~/.local/state/nacre/session.log
Session transcript.
.It Pa ~/.local/bin/nacre
Default installed executable path.
.It Pa ~/.local/bin/nacre-update
Default installed updater path.
.It Pa ~/.local/share/man/man1/nacre.1
Default installed manual page path.
.El
.Sh EXIT STATUS
.Ex -std
.Pp
When running commands with
.Fl c ,
.Fl Fl command ,
.Fl Fl script ,
or stdin, the exit status is the status returned by the executed Nacre input.
.Sh EXAMPLES
Start an interactive shell:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nacre
.Ed
.Pp
Run a project check:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nacre -c 'doctor .'
.Ed
.Pp
Inspect the real Perl runtime:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nacre -c 'perl-runtime'
nacre -c '= perl_runtime()->{executable}'
.Ed
.Pp
Run without user configuration:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nacre --plain --no-rc -c 'echo hello'
.Ed
.Pp
Check Perl files in the current directory:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nacre -c 'for my $f (files "*.pl") { run("perl", "-c", $f) }'
.Ed
.Sh COMPATIBILITY
Nacre intentionally does not clone every Bash or POSIX shell feature.
Use
.Ic compat
when exact shell syntax is required:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
compat 'for f in *.c; do echo "$f"; done'
.Ed
.Pp
Normal Nacre command lines do not go through Bash by default.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr perl 1
.Pp
Project documentation is available in
.Pa README.md ,
.Pa CHANGELOG.md ,
.Pa CONTRIBUTING.md ,
.Pa SECURITY.md ,
and
.Pa docs/LANGUAGE.md .
.Sh AUTHORS
.An Robert Nelson
.Sh BUGS
Report security issues according to
.Pa SECURITY.md .
Report other bugs through the project issue tracker.
